For ideas about buildings with a complex water
system and how water monitoring is useful,
here is an example of a research building
on the Tempe campus of Arizona State University,
located in the southwest desert.
The variety of rooms in this building are
classrooms, meeting rooms, a museum, offices,
labs, break rooms, and bathrooms.
Water conservation is essential in the southwest
desert and this building was designed to conserve
water and use water more efficiently.​
Water efficiency measures can result in water
spending more time traveling through the pipes
in the building.
For water that sits in pipes, deterioration
can be a factor the longer it sits stagnant.
Standing water in pipes may foster bacteria
growth and metal leaching from the pipes.
Neither of those sound good, right?​
​So how do building operators typically
monitor water quality for safety?
Unsafe water monitoring is typically done
by manual water sampling throughout the building.
Then water quality analysis is done by a testing
lab.
The process is time and labor intensive.
That’s where monitoring water quality real-time
is beneficial.
Timely data gathering helps with taking prompt
corrective action if needed.
This is a water quality sensor installed under
a break room sink.
The sensor monitors pH, conductivity, temperature,
dissolved oxygen, oxidation-reduction potential,
and chlorine.
The measurements are useful for detecting
changes in the water being supplied by the
city and deterioration in water quality in
the building due to low water use.
City water often has a disinfectant chemical
residual of chlorine.
If chlorine is not detected in the water,
it suggests the water has been stagnant for
a long time and increased water use is needed
such as flushing faucets.
The key water monitoring innovation with mobile
sensor kits is the ability to monitor water
quality in real-time and transmit the data
to a computer or the internet.
This is the data dashboard for the water sensor
package located under the break room sink.
Readings for chlorine, oxidation-reduction
potential or ORP, and temperature are displayed
providing ability to visualize the data over
time.
This project is monitoring water quality at
a weekly interval by floor in the building.
The data helped identify changes occurring
that might need attention, such as times when
the chlorine level is too low.​
Dashboards can be made as simple or sophisticated
as desired, and there are existing software
and apps available to create dashboards.
​
You can determine what information will be
useful to your tracking and analysis.
For example, is data visualization enough,
or do you want to be able to analyze and/or
download the data.
What is the timeframe for the data?
Thinking through the information you want
to get from the data dashboard provides direction
on how to get there.
​
Here are a few considerations when creating,
installing, and using a water sensor package.
​First know the building and plumbing codes
and permitting requirements.
It is critical that the water sensor package
follow applicable plumbing codes and go through
the proper approval process.
​Second is having a reliable power supply and
internet connection.
Power can be supplied by batteries or electrical
outlet.
​Third, data storage and data visualization
are key to realizing the benefits of the water
sensor package.
Data can be stored locally on the microcomputer
connected to the sensors or transmitted over
the internet and stored in the cloud.
Internet access requires either a wireless
or hard-wired connection and the necessary
network requirements.
​Fourth, develop a plan for communicating and
sharing the data.
What’s needed will depend on the project
goals and the organization’s needs.
It is important to have a strategy for clear
communication and a data sharing plan in place.
​Fifth, the sensors, hardware, and software
require routine maintenance and periodic upgrades
and replacements.
Personnel are required to monitor and maintain
the system. ​